one particularly powerful and beautiful
idea and computer science is that of the
higher order function a function that
takes other functions as data so I'll
give a little example here in Python and
even if you've never seen something
quite like this or even never seen
Python I think what's happening here
should be clear so in Python we can
define a function 10 X their returns 10
times X that's it so I'm do 10 X of 5 no
will return 50 now I can actually define
a function say do twice that takes two
arguments one that you expect to be a
function in the other you expect to be
some kind of argument to that type of
function and so in that case we could do
something like return the function
applied to the result of the function
applied to X and so I can for example
say Python please print for me the
result of doing twice the 10x function 2
so that'll do
10 X of 10 X of 2 which is 10 times 10
times 2 which is 200 ok so what we're
gonna try and do is this same program
but in Java and we'll see it's a little
more challenging a little bit kludgy ER
than it is in python but this idea turns
out actually it's very important so in
older school Java Java 7 and earlier you
had to do it in a somewhat indirect way
that we'll be exploring through the rest
of this video and the fundamental issue
was that memory boxes or a K variables
they cannot contain pointers to
functions in the old versions of Java so
we can't write a function that has a
function type here remember that a job
we have to do type checking and there
just was no type for functions you
couldn't do it and so instead the
workaround was to take advantage of
implementation or sign interface
inheritance where we would define some
abstract function e thing that doesn't
have a specific function in mind and
then we would implement that class and
we would override some otherwise
undefined method ok we'll see what that
means in a moment now of course in
modern Java you can actually do this but
for so long Java programs are written
this way that it's the default way of
thinking in a lot of cases like
comparators and any other number of
things that we'll be talking about in
the coming weeks
so we're gonna stick with this approach
and if you want to try out the new Java
8 or the newer Java 8 stuff I'll have a
separate supplementary video at some
point you can check out but this is the
way we really need to learn things now
ok so let's just try it out and it'll be
a little strange until we're done but
we're gonna start by making our int
unary function class or interface and so
the int unary function class this
basically we're gonna say first
represents a function that takes in an
integer and returns an integer any
function right they could be 10 X it
could be squaring whatever now we're not
gonna actually specify what function in
particular we're just gonna say public
and supply and X and call it a day
there's no default now actually I want
to note here this public key word is
underlined and IntelliJ is yelling at us
that public is redundant so in keeping
with common convention I'm now going to
omit that from our code okay doesn't do
anything having it or not so now we're
going to actually implement a specific
into nary function in particular let's
write a function that returns 10 times
its argument so this 10 X class
implements int unary function it has a
public int apply method that's what it
needs in order to compile actually need
that int X and in this case it returns
10 times its argument and returns 10
times the argument so that's easy return
10 times X and we have now in 10 X okay
great so what we built is this on the
right which is the equivalent of def 10
X then we could see it's a lot kludgy
err in fact here we have it spread
across two files that one and this one
and that's the equivalent of def 10 X
okay so again job is pretty verbose so
now we're gonna say new class and we're
gonna do a little demo we'll call that
hop demo for higher-order function and
this demonstrates higher-order functions
and Java
so this is going to be these other two
calls so we'll start by writing the do
twice method so I'll do it as some
follows public static int do twice why
static because I don't want to have to
actually instantiate HOF demo and what
we're going to do is we're gonna take an
int unary function f I'll do ya
Epstein's line and then we'll do end X
and in this case we're gonna return F
it's not f of f of X like it was in
Python is going to be F dot apply of F
dot a plot of X so basically we've used
inheritance as a funny workaround to get
the same practical effect that we got in
Java or saw in Python
more directly next I'm going to show you
how it can be used and we'll see it's a
little funny so I'm gonna start by
saying well I guess I'll set aside an
integer too
and then I want to print out do twice 10
X X let's say well let's just do to
directly why not so we we try and do
this we get a an issue which says
expression expected here so 10 X
actually is the name of a class and it's
expecting an object so in fact what we
need to do is instantiate our 10x object
so we can do something like this
we'll say int unary function 10x equals
new 10x that's better to be lower case
so 10x equals new 10x and now we pass an
instantiated copy of the 10x class now
it's a little weird but that's typically
how things are done so if we run this
now we should get back
uh-oh wrong one the vengeful s list it
remembers it's still very upset about it
it's not remembers being deleted but
here we see 200 okay so that's Hoff's in
Java so on the Left I have all the code
we just wrote and I guess the the main
thing to keep in mind here is that while
you can't directly do it in Java
inheritance provides us with a way to
actually accomplish the same thing and
we're going to be using this a lot
in the coming week actually a couple
weeks so the very last thing we're gonna
call it a day here I've put together
here in inheritance cheat sheet you can
use to remember how all this works I'm
not going to read it off right now but
be aware that this is here for your
reference so that's it for this set of
videos and I will see you next time when
we'll go a little deeper and to
higher-order functions and beyond